---
layout: post
title: "Git Reset: Use With Caution"
date: 2016-08-23 18:43
description: "A brief explainer on `git reset` - and why it probably shouldn't be your go-to tool."
categories: ["software", "programming"]

show_meta: true
comments: true
mathjax: true
gistembed: true
published: true
noindex: false
nofollow: false
---

Today I was working through a well-designed git tutorial, part of a larger
exercise-based curriculum. (I won't say which company wrote this tutorial,
because their content is excellent in general!)

This tutorial introduced the `git reset` command as the correct way to revert to
an earlier commit. For instance, you've been working on some changes and you
don't like them, so you want to go back to an earlier commit. Or, you check the
remote repo, you see that someone else has pushed some changes, but you are two
commits ahead. You decide to go back to the last commit on the remote repo, so
you run `git reset commit-hash-here`.

Frankly, `git reset` kind of gives me the willies.

As [this great article](https://git-scm.com/blog/2011/07/11/reset.html) or this [great Stackoverflow post](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2530060/can-you-explain-what-git-reset-does-in-plain-english) explains, \`git reset\`
will do one of three things.

-   `git reset --soft` will undo your last commit, and make your HEAD (which
    tracks your latest commit) look like your staging area.
-   `git reset --mixed` will do the above, and then go on to undo your latest
    additions to your staging area.
-   `git reset --hard` will do both of the previous two steps, and then also erase
    your latest file changes and go back to the last commit.
-   `git reset --any-flag commit-hash-here` does everything above, but you specify
    exactly which commit we're going back to.

As you can see, `reset` is about destroying changes you don't like. But wait a
minute: git means never having to say you're sorry!

If you're not working on `master`, and hopefully you're not because you always
create a new branch and then switch to it because you're an awesome programmer,
then it's easy to leave out any changes you don't like. No need to destroy
things!

At the very least, I'd teach `git checkout commit-hash-here` first, and `git
reset` later. `git checkout` should be our bread and butter, so that we can take
full advantage of the magic of git.
