---
layout: post
title: Climate Change, Part the First
date: 2019-05-11
# Should be longer than 20 words, so it will appear as post summary
description: An introduction to why and how I changed my mind on climate change
# tags will also be used as html meta keywords.
categories: ["philosophy"]

show_meta: true
comments: true
mathjax: true
gistembed: true
published: true
noindex: false
nofollow: false
---

## Beginnings

In 2016, I wanted to find a cause to dedicate myself to, something important and
worthwhile. As part of this effort, I wanted to understand the global picture,
and I decided to figure out if climate change was worth worrying about.

Like many Americans, I was skeptical of the idea of climate change. And right
there, just typing that, I feel the urge to duck.

I've found that telling this story gets me no credit at all, no brownie points.
Conservatives respectfully listen to how I went about it, which appeals to them,
but they're a little sad I went over to the dark side. Liberals' eyes tend to
bug out a bit before they sputter yes, yes climate change is real, with a marked
air of disapprobation. Liberals don't really do redemption narratives.

One side has lost an ally to the damn hippies, the other side is indignant at my
temerity in questioning the Science I Fucking Love. The story makes no one very
happy. 

Nevertheless, I enjoyed the process and am proud of it, and I'm glad to
understand the world better. 

To be honest, had I reached the opposite conclusion, I might not have shared the
story. I lean liberal in many ways and so sticking to climate skepticism would
have won me no friends. In that case, you simply would not be reading this essay.

At any rate, after a month or two of somewhat obsessive researching, I concluded
that climate change is real and it's worth worrying about, although I do not
think it will cause the end of our civilization in the next few decades, as some
warn.

This is the story of what I believed, how I researched, and some of my
conclusions. Disclaimer: Climate science is a massive rabbit hole. A month or
two of research left many stones unturned!

## Why I Didn't Believe in Climate Change

A bit of personal history seems relevant here. I was raised to be very
conservative, politically and socially. My parents were Reagan Republicans and
part of Newt Gingrich's Moral Majority. Due to the conservative-evangelical
alliance, Protestant evangelicals often include climate skepticism in their
apologetics and worldview webpages and books (Catholicism is a broader church).

I'll just note quickly that climate skepticism, or anti-environmentalism more
generally, is a conservative political stance in the United States due to
accidents of our history. It has little to do with conservative political
philosophy as such. Elsewhere in the world, like the UK, the conservative
party - the Tories - are the environmentalists. Witness David Cameron's old
slogan, "Vote Blue, Get Green!"

I blamed conservatives for this bizarre preoccupation, until an interview with
the redoubtable Stewart Brand revealed that '60s leftists married their politics
and their environmentalism, thus defining the cause as a firmly left-of-center
position. Liberals must blame their own history, at least in part, for the fact
that climate change is a polarized issue in the United States.

However, by my mid-twenties I was no longer conservative, and in fact had moved
through an anarchist and then libertarian phase. 

(For the record, I now hold to a vague politics, sort of left-libertarian, where
I like both single-payer healthcare and Edward Snowden, and am very interested
in but skeptical of larger overhauls of our current economic and political
systems. It sounds a mess but is instantly recognizable in many circles.)

Further, I had read Ben Goldacre's books, Bad Pharma and Bad Science. These
remain very influential to me. They build on John Ioannidis' wonderful work
showing that up to half of all drug trials and psychology studies are, sadly,
complete bunk. Ioannidis' studies are frankly terrifying, since no one can buy
effective treatment when the underlying science has been faked. Those are
substantial areas of science filled with quackery. The same goes for nutrition
science, where the experts will throw understudied biochemical pathways at you
to support contradictory recommendations.

My skepticism of the expert establishment was only strengthened by my awareness
that hospitals are good places to steer clear of, by my law-school-born disdain
for our criminal system, and by my readings in financial independence.

For climate science specifically, I'd been influenced by Michael Crichton's
novel State of Fear. Crichton loved to turn his novels into popular science
books, and he worked hard to make this one convincing. Thanks to Crichton, I was
probably as familiar with climate science as the average American, but my
background awareness was slanted against the consensus.

At the same time, I was aware that most of the scientists who studied the topic
did in fact say climate change is real. And because I'd been raised creationist,
I was familiar with how pseudoscientific arguments work and how they can be
debunked. Scientific reputation has something of an efficient market effect
going for it: an easy debunking is a dollar bill on the sidewalk, begging to be
picked up.

Take it all around, and I was very willing to be convinced, but I was not
willing to be convinced by appeals to authority. It seemed a more granular
approach was called for, especially as I wanted to take action on my findings.

I'm confident in my intellectual abilities, and I decided to figure it out for
myself. 

## How I Started Off 

My modus operandi was simple. I found the most intelligent skeptic arguments I
could, and wrote down the bullet points. Then I researched the arguments pro and
con each bullet point, by listening to a few choice lectures, reading several
books, and perusing websites dedicated to the controversy such as xxx.

In other words, I started not with the climate scientists, but with the
skeptics, so that their voices wouldn't be drowned out. The best skeptics I am
aware of are Michael Crichton, Simon Ridley, and Judith Curry.

This method, as I've said, tends to win the respect of conservatives.

## Onward

This post dealt with reasons, background, and procedures. In the next post I'll begin to work down toward the nitty-gritty.
