---
layout: post
title: Climate Change, Part the Second
date: 2019-05-11
# Should be longer than 20 words, so it will appear as post summary
description: The second in a series on climate change
# tags will also be used as html meta keywords.
categories: ["philosophy"]

show_meta: true
comments: true
mathjax: true
gistembed: true
published: true
noindex: false
nofollow: false
---

## Pseudoscience

The facts of evolution and climate science rest on a broad array of
observations. As a result, the broad strokes of the picture are easily followed
by an intelligent layperson. You do not need to be a scientist to attack or to
defend either area of science. If you observe, more or less neutrally, the broad
range of evidence, you'll see a strong and consistent picture emerge, the
picture described by the theories of evolution and climate science.

To say this again, I claim that if you look at *all* the evidence available, and
just use a little common sense, you'll very quickly agree with scientific
consensus on these matters. It's actually not that complicated.

Accordingly, creationists, ESP believers, vaccine skeptics, and climate deniers
tend to follow a recognizable pattern of argumentation. Each of these groups
focuses on a few controversies, centering the entire debate on those areas of
evidence. And in every case, their account of those areas of evidence simply
leaves out key pieces of the story. That, in a word, is how pseudoscience works.

To give you an example, when I was a young creationist, I heard a lot about how
carbon dating supposedly relied on circular argumentation. "The rocks date the
fossils, and the fossils date the rocks!" Unsurprisingly, this problem has also
occurred to the good folks in lab coats working with the dang rocks and fossils,
and they are happy to explain how they mitigate the problem. The creationist
community acts as though no one else has ever thought of this trivial objection.

Further, I never heard of the many other methods of dating (tree rings, ice
cores, cosmic radiation). The creationists try to center the argument around the
least essential parts of the theory.

Perhaps surprisingly, this characteristic of pseudoscientific discourse makes
for a good entry point into the actual science. If you want to learn about
evolution or climate science, one good way is to start with the skeptics'
arguments, and then look up the mainstream rebuttal of those arguments. You'll
quickly hear the other side of the story, and hear many more parts of the story
besides. 

You will see the pseudoscientific pattern of argumentation in this story.

## A Quick Word on Terms

I dislike the term "climate denialism." It's an inappropriate appropriation, so
to speak, from Holocaust deniers, and such rhetoric never convinces the other
side.

I'm still going to use it because I need to distinguish several sorts of climate
skeptics. To me, a denier doesn't think global warming / climate change is
occurring at all. A lukewarmer thinks climate change is occurring but it doesn't
matter very much.

Of course, an alarmist thinks climate change is occurring and is a problem.

It turns out that we can put a number on your lukewarmist vs. alarmist
tendencies. If you think the climate will warm by 12&deg; C by the end of this
century, like Bill McKibben does, you are an extreme alarmist. That rate of
increase basically dooms human civilisation. If you think 1.5&deg; C or less, you
are a lukewarmist. The IPCC projections say about 3&deg; C.

I don't have competence to make fine-grained distinctions, but haven't seen
anything so far to move me out of the middle of the IPCC projections, 2.4&deg; C.

Sometimes skeptics say that environmentalists called it "global warming" until
they were embarrassed not to find any global warming, when they retreated to the
vaguer "climate change." For the record, the climate is warming, but it's also
changing more broadly, so I'll use both terms.

## Denialists and Lukewarmists

Returning to my analogy with other areas of pseudoscience, the climate
denialists parallel creationists, in that their arguments are so easily rebutted
that they're not very interesting.

The climate lukewarmists, on the other hand, level some good objections and
serve to keep alarmists honest.

Simon Ridley mixes denialist and lukewarmist arguments. Judith Curry stays pretty firmly in the usefully-skeptical lukewarmist camp.

As we'll see, we rely on climate models only to tell us how fast the climate
will warm, not whether it will warm. Hence Curry's objections affect only the
correct degree of alarmism.

## Bias

In law school, I watched a federal case over whether a pro-life clinic was
holding itself out as a medical clinic, in violation of an Austin ordinance, and
over whether the Austin ordinance was constitutional. The disputants spent a lot
of time arguing whether the ordinance _intended_ to discriminate against
pro-lifers. The judge (known to be excellent) finally mildly observed that most
laws are enacted by someone with a point of view, and evidence of bias on one
side or the other wouldn't much matter to him. The disputants stared at him for
a second and then carried right on arguing about intentional bias.

I feel about bias much the way that judge felt. Ridley, for instance, points out
that humanity's greedy consumption of energy raised us all from Neolithic levels
of agriculture, and his opponents retort that he comes from a family with ties
to coal. I agree with Ridley on how good energy has been for us so far, and will
ignore attacks of bias.

## Ridley's *Prima Facie* Case

With all of this said, let's start where I started, with Simon Ridley.

In these two columns, Matt Ridley provides four main reasons to be a lukewarmer. 

First, he says, predictions of doom have a poor track record, and rely on a
degree of precision in climate models that we do not have. 

Second, in fact the temperature has risen slowly, diseases have not multiplied,
and sea level is rising incredibly slowly.

Third, all predictions of disaster rest upon positive feedback mechanisms, which
the evidence shows do not exist: temperature hasn't risen as predicted by
models, ice cores show that temperature and carbon dioxide are not closely
linked, there is no tropical troposphere hot-spot, and climate sensitivity
appears to be low. 

Fourth and last, the politicisation of the field and persecution of the
slightest heresy delegitimize the entire process.

Put another way: the climate models cannot be relied upon; the evidence shows
climate change is not a problem; the necessary positive feedback mechanisms
don't exist; the process is suspect.

It is always worth asking "so what?" And there's a good answer: so we can't
believe in climate alarmism. Ridley here does lay out a *prima facie* case for
lukewarmism. That is, assuming what he says is true, then climate alarmism
cannot be supported. These are reasonable and powerful arguments, and deserve to
be taken seriously.

### Predictions of Doom, and Politics

The first and fourth points are Ridley's best. On both of these points, Ridley
is largely right, and we should all take a lesson
here.

Over the last half of the twentieth century, the public was treated to multiple
prognostications of disaster: population explosion, oil exhaustion, elephant
extinction, rainforest loss, acid rain, the ozone layer, desertification,
nuclear winter, the running out of resources, pandemics, falling sperm counts,
cancerous pesticide pollution and so forth.
  
There was a consistent pattern of exaggeration, says Ridley, followed by damp squibs.

However, and there's a pretty big however here, a few of these were true. The
ozone layer was a real problem, and as a result of the prophesy of doom we acted
to stop its decay. Nuclear winter was avoided only because policy leaders kept
its possibility always in mind, and then only just. Y2K, which Ridley doesn't
mention, fits the same mold.

For that matter, Marxism fits the mold of "avoids doom due to accurate
prophesies". Capitalists could read *Das Kapital* too, and they enacted
ameliorist policies, which Marxists despise because they work effectively to
prevent revolution.

politicisation of the field. Climate alarmists are rewarded, massively - both
professionally and financially. Climate skeptics are vilified.

Steward Brand says something similar in /Whole Earth Discipline/. The Green
movement is made up of romantics and of scientists, with engineers a recent
addition.

The romantics love what is natural, rural, bucolic, pastoral, wild, pure,
authentic. Combine that anti-technological, anti-modernist aesthetic with
humanity's virulent political streak, and you have hysterics, scares, and
persecutions. 

Any change, it seems, spells disaster. More population? We'll starve. Less
population (as will occur in the next few decades)? We'll go extinct.

Elephant extinction, rainforest loss, acid rain, and the ozone layer did not
occur precisely because of those dire warnings. This is the same reason economic
silver bullets never last: as soon as you figure out how it all works, all the
other market participants adjust their behavior. The prediction changes the
system, and so we can never predict the future.

Our inability to foresee, because the future changes in response to our
predictions, means that the original predictions may well have been
accurate. Those predictions diverted us from a future we did not want to
inhabit: one without majestic elephants, with much less rainforest, and with
much less ozone.

Still, we must beware of overhyped solutions and overhyped dangers. Rule: /Don't
believe the hype./ At least not without careful investigation, over a longer
timespan than we naturally incline to.

The politicisation of the field can and should lessen our faith in the outcome
of the process, climate alarmism.

### Temperatures and Models

In his second and third arguments, Ridley starts going downhill fast. This is
the denialist part, with slipshod and somewhat deceptive argumentation.

First, Ridley argues that we have seen only half a degree of warming over four
decades, which sounds paltry. But that is precisely the projected rate:
0.113&deg; C per decade, with the rate now rising. I cannot tell what, beyond a
quick rhetorical trick, lies behind this point.

Ridley is prone to motte-and-bailey arguments, sometimes implying there's no
warming at all, and then when challenged retreating, claiming he only ever has
stuck to middle-of-the-road predictions. It's annoying, actually.

Ridley relies heavily on the "warming hiatus." Basically, for about 10 years,
scientists couldn't find as much warming as they expected. This was
embarrassing, though actually it shoudn't have been.

Global warming is a macro-trend, bigger than 10 years. A 10-year blip doesn't
mean anything when we are worried about the overall trend.

Similarly, Warren Buffett is happy to watch a company's stock decline - such
short-term drops do not mean anything to the value investor, with his eye on the
long term. The fundamentals are solid, and the company will rise again.

In addition, the IPCC report notes that climate models have improved since the
2005 report, so that they can now model increments of 50 years, but not of 10
years. Climate explanations and predictions are made over 30 years, classically.

Finally, the hiatus is misnamed - global warming continued, only more slowly.

### Feedback Mechanisms



Ridley argues that CO_2 helps the planet green. Increased vegetation acts as a
negative feedback mechanism (it's a growing carbon sink) and is good for humans
and animals in general. This is true, but it is one of those half-formed points
that leaves out the other side of the story.

More CO_2 helps only up to a point. Past that point, it doesn't harm the plants,
but it doesn't help them either. The negative feedback mechanism, serving to
slow global warming, stops working. Sadly, we can't rely on increased forest
cover to stabilize climate change.


Ridley's other objections remain and must be addressed before climate science
can be trusted. So far, though, Ridley is not coming off terribly well. He left
out important parts of the story about CO_2 and plant greening, and CO_2 and past
ice ages. 

By doing so, the conclusions that negative feedback from plant greening would
stop global warming, and that CO_2 and temperature have little to do with each,
appeared inescapable.


## Paleoclimatology

Nassim Taleb has a wonderful skepticism toward explanations. If eating a
low-carb, high-fat diet helps you, the just-so explanations (keto! autophagy!)
are irrelevant. And you might have noticed that every dietary school of thought
takes pains to pad out its prescriptions with metabolic pathways. So much
"science," so little light.

Similarly, positive and negative feedback mechanisms in climate science are
something of *ex post facto* stories. We need to figure them out to get a
precise handle on the schedule and degree of global warming, but they are not
the fact itself.

I'll give a second analogy to drive home this point about facts versus
explanations. Creationists argue that we do not have transitional fossils
suffient to prove that evolution occurred. 

Richard Dawkins notes that we are very lucky to have transitional fossils. They
help show the pathways evolution took. But we don't need them to see that
evolution's occurred. The theory of evolution doesn't rest on fossils, and was
established without most of the fossils we have today. The fossil evidence is
ancillary to the fact of evolution.

Similarly, our understanding *that* the earth is warming doesn't depend on our
understanding of *how exactly* it's warming.

We know the earth is warming due to carbon dioxide because if you look at the
earth's history, you can see that more CO_2 causes warming.

So yes, there's one lesson: rising CO_2 does not always, inevitably, lead to
catastrophic runaway climate change and heat death and desertification and so
on. Not if you're in an ice age, and maybe not other times either.

And there's a second lesson: more CO_2 does in fact amplify warming.

How can we tell if more CO_2 will lead to positive feedback due to amplifiers?
Again, to understand climate, we have to pay attention to sun as well as CO_2 as
well as earth cover (forests vs. white ice), and of course that's just a start.

Sun + CO_2 = hotness. No sun + CO_2 = coldness but not as cold as without CO_2.

There's a slingshot effect, which is magnificently revealing. When the earth was
covered in ice, or when the sun was far away due to precession, CO_2 rose quite
a lot, and the earth did not get much warmer. When the snow finally melted, all
that accumulated CO_2 raised the temperature quite a lot and quickly. In this
way we can see that CO_2 does raise the earth's temperature.

If there's no sun, you can have like 3000 ppm in the atmosphere before the ice
melts. If there's sun (like now and during all of *homo sapiens*' existence), you
need just 500 ppm to melt the ice.
