---
layout: post
title: Why the Police Need Fixing, and How to Do It
date: 2020-05-16
description: This one is for my conservative friends
# tags will also be used as html meta keywords.
show_meta: true
comments: true
mathjax: true
gistembed: true
published: true
noindex: false
nofollow: false
---

## Happy Independence Day

I am more or less left-libertarian, or left-liberal, these days, but I was
raised very conservative, and perhaps for that reason the state of modern
conservatism makes my blood boil. I respect traditionalists, though I disagree
with them. But I find it hard to take the sight of shallow, ahistorial,
parochial authoritarianism masquerading as conservatism.

Nowhere is this tendency more evident than in the right's reflexive support of
police, even as they wave "Don't Tread on Me" flags. The power of police in the
United States is deeply contrary to the traditions on which this nation was
founded. We were founded on the principles of local self-rule, and separation of
powers, and the unchecked power of police contradicts those principles.

Here are seven ways the police have too much power.

## Absolute Power Corrupts Absolutely

First, in many cities, the police are kingmakers. The mayor and council
absolutely must have the political support of police to get elected. Fall afoul
of them, and you're out of a job. This is the situation in New York, for instance,
where I think de Blasio was the first in many decades who didn't owe his job to
the police.

While I haven't looked into it, I'd bet the kingmaking power explains why
Minneapolis dissolved their police department. Halfhearted action would have
left the council vulnerable in the next election. The only way to escape the
political backlash from police was to root them out decisively, and start over
again.

Second, police unions are very strong indeed. The unions negotiate incredibly
generous contracts between the department and the city. These contracts ensure
that police officers get far better protection during an investigation than they
would receive in a court of law. And in many cities police officers make
$200k-$300k, even into retirement.

Third - and we haven't even gotten to the good stuff yet - police investigate
themselves. Typically, an "officer-involved shooting" will be investigated for
months, while public anger dies down, and the police "leak" damaging information
about the victim.

Fourth, for several years running, the police have taken more in civil asset
forfeiture than thieves have stolen. In civil asset forfeiture, the police
confiscate the money, without charging the owner with a crime. The money is
guilty until proven innocent. Then the police have to split the money between
the feds and themselves. They have taken mind-boggling amounts of money - I've
read many cases where they stopped a car with out-of-state license plates, and
took the guy's life savings.

They can use this money for their salaries, and to buy all the latest gear,
which is very important to them.

Fifth - this is a good one - judge-made law protects the police from getting
sued, even when they have done wrong. I have read several cases where the police
go to the wrong house, terrorize (and even shoot!) the family, and the family
gets kicked out of court. This is the judge-invented doctrine of qualified
immunity. In the Supreme Court's own words, it protects all but the plainly
incompetent and the knowingly malicious.

Even if the law plainly says what they did was illegal, the cop is still protected if the l

I honestly believe most conservatives are unaware that the police can break into
their homes and beat them up, savagely, and they would have no legal recourse at
all. I am not exaggerating. I have read the legal cases. That is the law, and
that is what happens.

Sixth, in the very rare cases where someone is allowed to sue a cop for doing
wrong, the city will pay the cop's legal bills, including the judgment against
the cop. Not a dime comes out of a police officer's pockets, even in really
terrible cases where they abuse their power to beat the hell out of some kid on
the side of the road.

Seventh, in the very rare cases where a police investigation decides that a
police officer did something wrong, and the department decides to fire that
person, often they simply are not allowed to fire them. The contract that the
police union has negotiated forbids it.

## Police Culture

Even the Most Holy Roman and Catholic Church, when deprived of accountability, shuffled pedophile priests around like they were playing a shell game. Keep your eye on the ball, find the ball, where is the pedophile, where's the priest, as they jumped around parishes and states to start over. And then the bishops did the same thing with money, to avoid getting sued by the victims.

It's an iron law of human nature: power without accountability will fester into a stinking, rotting wound on the body politic. If you believe police can have all the power I've outlined above, and somehow stay on the strait and narrow path, then you're more credulous and naive than any liberal that ever breathed.

I just do not believe that police departments have more saints than the Catholic Church. Maybe I'm cynical, maybe I've been mugged by reality.

## What should be done?

In the United States, we have something we call "civilian control of the
military." It's not generals or admirals who decide military strategy. A
civilian decides: the president. Some politican says "jump," and the Joint
Chiefs of Staff ask "how high?"

The military is very proud of this fact, and so should we all be. In our
nation's military academies - West Point, Annapolis, the Air Force Academy -
they proudly teach every new generation of military leaders that their highest
honor is to obey the orders of a civilian.

Many senior military officers even advertise that they do not vote at all, such
is their concern to remain nonpartisan, obedient to whoever happens to be the
lawfully elected representative of the country. I am not saying they shouldn't
vote - every soldier and sailor is also a citizen - but that's their choice.

By contrast, we lack civilian control of the police. Each community should be
able to fire a police officer, when they believe they can no longer rely on that
police officer.

Don't tell me "the inmates will run the asylum!" I'm not an inmate. I'm a former
lawyer, a veteran, a software engineer. I deserve to decide who polices my
community, and so do you.

I am reminded of the US Navy. When they find it necessary to relieve a captain
of his command, they say simply that they have lost confidence in his ability to
command the ship. They need no other justification.

We should be able to fire an underperforming police officer, and we should also
be able to sue them in a court of law. We must reverse judge-made law that
prevents us from seeking justice in a court of law.

Mark my words: every "reform" aimed at improving culture or training is worse
than useless unless we gain political and legal control of our police.

Concentrating so much power in the police is downright un-American. The police
are the government, and we must regain a government of the people, by the
people, for the people.
