#+BEGIN_HTML
---
layout: post
title: The Chairless Office
date: 2016-10-27 19:41
# Should be longer than 20 words, so it will appear as post summary
description: Maybe an actual lifehack, for once! Here's how to sit healthily and guilt-free, improve your range of motion and feel better.
# tags will also be used as html meta keywords.
tags:
  - Health
  - Fitness

show_meta: true
comments: true
mathjax: true
gistembed: true
published: true
noindex: false
nofollow: false
---
#+END_HTML

The personal movement revolution has presented us with an overwhelming range of
options.

The best thing for humans is to move slowly almost all the time, and then move
fast or heavy or both for short periods of time. You're supposed to train
cardio, strength, explosiveness, trying out as many sports as possible. On top
of that, you're still supposed to put in an hour of mobility work every day.

And /then/ you need to add extra stretches to undo the damage you've done by
sitting all day: your legs going dead, your hamstrings shortening, your hip
flexors stiffening and shortening. Of course, when you're sitting, you're /not
moving slowly/, which is what we want for our default.

As the Gymnastics Strength Training creator Christopher Sommers reminds us,
mobility is the golden key. Every day we train our bodies to bend just far
enough to put our hands past our knees. Every day we train our legs not to split
any farther than about 30 degrees.

After years of this, our bodies adapt to what we've asked of it. And then we
say, "Man, as you get old, you get stiff! Lucky kids!"

It's like in the original /Alice in Wonderland/. The Red Queen tells Alice, here
we have to run twice as fast just to stay in place. You'll have to run even
faster if you want to get ahead!

I know what you're thinking: not another standing desk plug! Standing desks got
popular a few years ago, and despite naysayers and mockery it's now clear
they're here to stay. Just standing up /some/ of the time, or alternating between
sitting and standing, is a huge improvement. It gets you moving, it allows you
to stretch, many people find their energy improves.

But that's not what I'm here to tell you. I have something better. What if you
could turn the /entirety of your work day/ into a training session?  What if you
could avoid damaging yourself just by doing your job, and actually help
yourself?

And here, ladies and gentlemen, I introduce my latest movement innovation:
*you're allowed to sit, just not in a chair.*

With back against the wall, I sit on a cushion or towel on the floor, with my
legs straight, or stretched apart, or soles of the feet together, or in the
90-90 position. Recognize any of these? That's right, each is a normal stretch
which just happens to be comfortable for long periods of time and easily
supports a keyboard in front of you.

Pavel Tsatsouline tells the story of a man who sat with his feet stretched apart
every day as he watched TV, in a completely comfortable position. Over the
course of a year, he reached the splits.

Each of these positions allows me to gently work on passive stretching. Without
thinking about it, I'm naturally shifting my position slightly most of the
time. This means my muscles are engaged, not dead like in a chair, and I'm not
training the horrible range of motion that chairs force on us.

When I get tired of that I squat, or sit on my feet seiza-style, or kneel on one
knee for a great hip stretch, or even a pigeon stretch. These are all more
active sitting postures, so I don't use them when focusing deeply, or for long
periods of time.

When I get tired of that, I stand for a while. While standing, of course, I can
put one leg on top of a chair for another stretch, shift my weight, put one foot
up on a ball or play bar.

Heck, I could lie down.

I've been doing this for awhile now and I'm really feeling the benefits. My body
did have to adjust for a week or so, as my back muscles figured out they weren't
in a chair anymore. But I feel more alert, my range of motion has increased, my
legs are loving being moved in different positions all day. Especially when I'm
sitting with my feet together or split apart, it allows me to focus for more
than an hour before coming up for air.

Clearly this won't be right for every office setup, but if you can get one of
those IKEA standing desks that adjust all the way up or down, or just put your
laptop or monitor on a chair, you can easily transition all the way from
standing to sitting on the floor. I use a standalone keyboard with a long cord
and position my computer at some appropriate height in front of me, so I can
work in almost any position.

In a nutshell, move like ancient humans did: stand or sit on the ground. Stretch
in as many ways as you can think of, while exercising your brain as only the
modern world ever has. Now your entire work day trains your supporting muscles
in many postures, and your entire work day is a mobility training session.

The benefits are enormous, and now you can sit guilt-free.

